# Internationalisation & Localisation

Athanatos CMS is designed from the ground up to be internationalised and localisable. Any forward-facing fields are stored as JSON objects, keyed by language code or locale.

While Laravel provides very good internationalisation features of its own, a CMS needs to be able to store and retrieve content in multiple languages for its content. This is why we need to provide our own internationalisation and localisation features.

## Configuration

The configuration file contains a few directives which control the internationalisation and localisation of the CMS:

```php
[
    "default_language" => "en",
    "fallback_language" => "en",
    "supported_languages" => ["en" => ['en_GB', 'en_US'], "fr"=>[]],
    "language_format" => "xx-YY",
    "set_locale" => false,
    'persist_language_in_session' => true,
]
```

You should note that the language codes are only lightly validated - they can be a simple two-character language code, or a five character locale code cosnsisting of a two-letter language code separated by either a hyphen or underscore and then a two letter country code.

The `default_language` configuration directive specifies the language code that is used when no current language is selected (see below).

The `fallback_language` configuration directive is the language code used when the desired translation is not available - for example if you have `en` and `de` translations set, the `fallback_language` is set to `en` and you request an `fr` translation, the system will return the `en` translation. Set this directive to an empty string to disable fallbacks.

The `supported_languages` configuration directive is an array of language codes, each of which is an array of aliases codes. The keys in this array are the canonical list of supported language codes, and if the value array has values in it any of these values will be accepted as an alias for the key. This is useful if you have several dialects you want to support, but the translated content will not change between them. If you want separate translations for each dialect, you should add them as separate keys.

The `language_format` configuration directive is the format in which the language code is stored in the database. The system will attempt to reformat any language codes to this format when using Athanatos CMS internationalisation and localisation functions.

The `set_locale` configuration directive is a boolean which controls whether the system will set the locale to the current language code. This is useful if you want Laravel's localisation functions to use the current language code, forming a basic link between the two internationalisation features.

The `persist_language_in_session` configuration directive is a boolean which controls whether the system will persist the current language code in the user's session. If you disable this feature the AthanatosL10nMiddleware will still set the current language for you from the URL, `Accept-Language` header or the current session language code, but changes to the session language code will need to be made manually using `AthanaosCms::setSessionLang()`.

## Changing the current language

Athanatos CMS has a concept of "current language"; this is a language code which is set and used when storing or retrieving information. This will be set to the default language to begin with, but you can select a new current language using the `setLang` method from the `AthanatosCms` facade:

```php
$model = AthanatosArticle::first(); // Fetch an article
echo $model->title; // Will output the title in the current language

AthanatosCms::setLang('fr'); // Set the current language to French
echo $model->title; // Will output the title in French

AthanatosCms::setLang('de'); // Set the current language to German
$model->update(['title' => 'Hallo Welt']); // Update the title in German
```

## Changing the session language

While you can change language in the code as needed, it's often the case that the user will select a language and you'll want to persist this for the duration of their session. Internally this is done using the `setSessionLang` and `getSessionLang` methods from the `AthanatosCms` facade:

```php
AthanatosCms::setSessionLang('fr'); // Set the session language to French
echo AthanatosCms::getSessionLang(); // Will output 'fr'
```

While you can do this manually, this is generally done automatically by the `AthanatosL10nMiddleware` middleware, which will set the session language from the URL, the `Accept-Language` header or the current session language code.

## Automatic language selection

The `AthanatosL10nMiddleware` middleware will automatically set the current language from the URL, the `Accept-Language` header or the current session language code. This means that you can set the language in the URL, and the system will automatically select the correct language for you.

This is desirable for the CMS, so we include this as standard for the CMS routes, but you can also apply this to your own routes by adding the middleware to your route group:

```php
use SteJaySulli\AthanatosCms\Middleware\AthanatosL10nMiddleware;

Route::middleware(['web', AthanatosL10nMiddleware::class])->group(function () {
    // Your routes here
});
```

Note that the URL language code is only obtained from the first segment following the configured `base_url` in the configuration file. If your routes are not within this base URL, you can still use the Session Language and the `Accept-Language` header to set the language, otherwise consider setting the session language manually using `AthanatosCms::setSessionLang()`.

## Retrieving the current language

If you ever need to get the language code of the current language, you can use the `getLang` method from the `AthanatosCms` facade:

```php
echo AthanatosCms::getLang(); // Will output the current language code
```

## Localising Model Fields

Models are internationalised using the `SteJaySulli\AthanatosCms\Traits\Translatable` cast. This cast will automatically cast any fields to a JSON object, keyed by language code and according to the current language. For example, here we set up a model with a translatable field:

```php
use SteJaySulli\AthanatosCms\I18n\TranslatableCast;

class MyModel
{
    protected $fillable = [
        'my_translatable_field',
    ];

    protected $casts = [
        'my_translatable_field' => TranslatableCast::class,
    ];
}

$model = MyModel::create([
    'my_translatable_field' => "this is a test",
]);

AthanatosCms::setLang('fr');

$model->update([
    'my_translatable_field' => "ceci est un test",
]);

dump($model); // my_translatable_field will look something like this:
              // { "en": "this is a test", "fr": "ceci est un test" }

echo $model->my_translatable_field; // Will output "ceci est un test"
```

## The Translatable Class

The `TranslatableCast` shown above does not actually cast items directly to a string; instead it casts to the `SteJaySulli\AthanatosCms\I18nTranslatable` class which implements the `Stringable` interface and provides a `__toString` method.

This class is a wrapper around a JSON object, and provides a number of methods for interacting with the object.

This means that, while you can interact with fields as if they were strings, you can also interact with them in a variety of other ways:

```php
    $model = AthanatosArticle::first();

    $model->title = "There are {{value}} item(s)";

    // Get string of translation for the current language
    $model->title . "";             // "There are {{value}} item(s)"
    $model->title->toString();      // "There are {{value}} item(s)"
    $model->title->translate();     // "There are {{value}} item(s)"

    // Get string of translation for the current language with value replacement
    $model->title->translate(["value" => 1]);   // "There are 1 item(s)"

    // Translate into another language
    $model->title->translateInto("fr");     // "Il y a {{value}} article(s)"
    $model->title["fr"];                    // "Il y a {{value}} article(s)"

    // Translate into another language with value replacement
    $model->title->translateInto("fr", ["value" => 1]);     // "Il y a 1 article(s)"

    // Get the array representation
    $model->title->toArrray();          // ["en" => "There are {{value}} item(s)"]

    // Get the JSON representation
    $model->title->toJson();            // '{"en": "There are {{value}} item(s)"}'
    json_encode($model->title);         // '{"en": "There are {{value}} item(s)"}'

```

## Setting Translatable Fields

The `TranslatableCast` also handles setting of translatable fields. When you set a translatable field,you can use one of three different methods:

```php
    $model = AthanatosArticle::first();

    // Set the field to a string
    $model->title = "This is a test";

    // Set the field to an array object
    $model->title = ["en" => "This is a test"];

    // Set the field to a Translatable object
    $model->title = new Translatable(["en" => "This is a test"]);

    // Of course, the field will already be cast as a Translatable field
    // so you can also use the following methods to set values in the
    // translatable field:
    $model->title["it"] = "Questo è un test";
    $model->title->setTranslation("This is another test");
    $model->title->setTranslationFor("it", "Questo è un altro test");
```

##
